Beseech you, sir, be merry; youhave cause,
So have we all, of joy;for our escape
Is much beyond our loss.
Our hint of woe
Is common; every day somesailor's wife,
The masters of somemerchant and the merchant
Have just our theme ofwoe; but for the miracle,
I mean our preservation,few in millions
Can speak like us: thenwisely, good sir, weigh
Our sorrow with ourcomfort.
Prithee, peace.
He receives comfort likecold porridge.
The visitor will not givehim o'er so.
Look he's winding up thewatch of his wit;
by and by it will strike.
Sir--
One: tell.
When every grief isentertain'd that's offer'd,
Comes to the entertainer--
A dollar.
Dolour comes to him,indeed:
you have spoken truer thanyou purposed.
You have taken it wiselierthan I meant you should.
Therefore, my lord--
Fie, what a spendthrift ishe of his tongue.
I prithee, spare.
Well, I have done: butyet--
He will be talking.
Which, of he or Adrian,for a good wager,
first begins to crow?
-The old cock. -Thecockerel.
Done.
-The wager? -A laughter.
A match.
Though this island seem tobe desert--
Ha, ha, ha!
So, you're paid.
Uninhabitable and almostinaccessible--
Yet...
Yet--
He could not miss't.
It must needs be ofsubtle, tender anddelicate temperance.
Temperance was a delicatewench.
Ay, and a subtle; as hemost learnedly delivered.
The air breathes upon ushere most sweetly.
As if it had lungs androtten ones.
Or as 'twere perfumed by afen.
Here is everythingadvantageous to life.
True; save means to live.
Of that there's none, orlittle.
How lush and lusty thegrass looks.
How green.
The ground indeed istawny.
With an eye of green in't.
He misses not much.
No; he doth but mistakethe truth totally.
But the rarity of it is,
which is indeed almostbeyond credit--
As many vouched raritiesare.
That our garments, being,as they were,
drenched in the sea,
hold notwithstanding theirfreshness and glosses,
being rather new-dyed thanstained with salt water.
Is not, sir, my doublet asfresh as the first day Iwore it?
At Tunis at the marriageof your daughter,
who is now queen.
You cram these words intomy ears against
The stomach of my sense.
Would I had never
Married my daughter there!
For, coming thence,
My son is lost and, in myrate, she too,
Who is so far from Italyremoved I ne'er againshall see her.
O thou mine heir
Of Naples and of Milan,what strange fish
Hath made his meal onthee?
Sir, he may live: I saw himbeat the surges under him,
And ride upon their backs;he trod the water,
Whose enmity he flungaside, and breasted
The surge most swoln thatmet him; his bold head
'Bove the contentiouswaves he kept, and oar'd
Himself with his good armsin lusty stroke
To the shore, that o'erhis wave-worn basis bow'd,
As stooping to relievehim: I not doubt
He came alive to land.
No, no, he's gone.
Sir, you may thank yourselffor this great loss,
That would not bless ourEurope with your daughter,
But rather lose her to anAfrican;
Where she at least isbanish'd from your eye,
Who hath cause to wet thegrief on't.
Prithee, peace!
You were kneel'd to andimportuned otherwise
By all of us, and the fairsoul herself
Weigh'd between loathnessand obedience, at
Which end o' the beamshould bow.
We have lost your son,
I fear, for ever: Milanand Naples have
More widows in them ofthis business' making
Than we bring men tocomfort them:
The fault's your own!
So is the dear'st o' theloss!
My lord Sebastian,
The truth you speak dothlack some gentleness
And time to speak it in:you rub the sore,
When you should bring theplaster.
Very well.
And most chirurgeonly.
It is foul weather in usall, good sir,
When you are cloudy.
Foul weather?
Very fowl.
Had I plantation of thisisle, my lord--
He'd sow't withnettle-seed.
Or docks, or mallows.
And were the king on't,what would I do?
'Scape being drunk forwant of wine.
I' the commonwealth Iwould by contraries
Execute all things; for nokind of traffic
Would I admit; no name ofmagistrate;
Letters should not beknown; riches, poverty,
And use of service, none;contract, succession,
Bourn, bound of land,tilth, vineyard, none;
No use of metal, corn, orwine, or oil;
No occupation; all menidle, all;
And women too, butinnocent and pure;
No sovereignty--
Yet he would be king on't.
The latter end of hiscommonwealth forgets thebeginning.
All things in commonnature should produce
Without sweat or endeavour:treason, felony,
Sword, pike, knife, gun,or need of any engine,
Would I not have; butnature should bring forth,
Of its own kind, allfoison, all abundance,
To feed my innocentpeople.
No marrying 'mong hissubjects?
None, man; all idle:whores and knaves.
I would with suchperfection govern, sir,
To excel the golden age.
Save his majesty!
Long live Gonzalo!
And--do you mark me, sir?
Prithee, no more: thoudost talk nothing to me.
I do well believe yourhighness;
and did it to ministeroccasion to these gentlemen,
who are of such sensibleand nimble lungs
that they always use tolaugh at nothing.
'Twas you we laughed at.
Who in this kind of merryfooling
am nothing to you:
so you may continue andlaugh at nothing still.
Oh, what a blow was theregiven.
An it had not fallenflat-long.
You are gentlemen of bravemetal;
you would lift the moonout of her sphere,
if she would continue in itfive weeks without changing.
We would so, and then go abat-fowling.
Nay, good my lord, be notangry.
No, I warrant you;
I will not adventure mydiscretion so weakly.
Will you laugh me asleep,for I am very heavy?
Go sleep, and hear us.
What, all so soon asleep.
I wish my eyes
Would, with themselves,shut up my thoughts: I find
They are inclined to doso.
Please you, sir,
Do not omit the heavyoffer of it:
It seldom visits sorrow;when it doth,
It is a comforter.
We two, my lord,
Will guard your personwhile you take your rest,
And watch your safety.
Thank you.
Wondrous heavy.
What a strange drowsinesspossesses them.
It is the quality o' theclimate.
Why Doth it not then oureyelids sink?
I find not
Myself disposed to sleep.
Nor I; my spirits arenimble.
They fell together all, asby consent;
They dropp'd, as by athunder-stroke.
What might, WorthySebastian?
O, what might?
No more:
And yet me thinks I see itin thy face,
What thou shouldst be: theoccasion speaks thee, and
My strong imagination seesa crown
Dropping upon thy head.
What, art thou waking?
Do you not hear me speak?
I do; and surely
It is a sleepy languageand thou speak'st
Out of thy sleep.
What is it thou didst say?
This is a strange repose,to be asleep
With eyes wide open;standing, speaking, moving,
And yet so fast asleep.
Noble Sebastian,
Thou let'st thy fortunesleep-- die, rather; wink'st
Whiles thou art waking.
Thou dost snoredistinctly; There'smeaning in thy snores.
I am more serious than mycustom: you
Must be so too, if heedme; which to do
Trebles thee o'er.
Well, I am standing water.
I'll teach you how toflow.
Do so: to ebb
Hereditary sloth instructsme.
O, If you but knew how youthe purpose cherish
Whiles thus you mock it.
How, in stripping it,
You more invest it.
Ebbing men, indeed,
Most often do so near thebottom run
By their own fear orsloth.
Prithee, say on:
The setting of thine eyeand cheek proclaims
A matter from thee, and abirth indeed
Which throes thee much toyield.
Thus, sir:
Although this lord of weakremembrance, this,
Who shall be of as littlememory
When he is earth'd, hathhere almost persuaded--
For he's a spirit ofpersuasion, only
Professes to persuade--the king his son's alive,
'Tis as impossible thathe's undrown'd
As he that sleeps hereswims.
I have no hope
That he's undrown'd.
O, out of that "no hope"
What great hope have you.
No hope that way is
Another way so high a hopethat even
Ambition cannot pierce awink beyond,
But doubt discovery there.
Will you grant with me
That Ferdinand is drown'd?
He's gone.
Then, tell me,
Who's the next heir ofNaples?
Claribel.
She that is queen ofTunis; she that dwells
Ten leagues beyond man'slife; she that from Naples
Can have no note, unlessthe sun were post--
The man i' the moon's tooslow-- till new-born chins
Be rough and razorable;she that from whom
We all were sea-swallow'd,though some cast again,
And by that destiny toperform an act
Whereof what's past isprologue, what to come
In yours and my discharge.
What stuff is this.
How say you?
'Tis true, my brother'sdaughter's queen of Tunis;
So is she heir of Naples;'twixt which regions
There is some space.
A space whose every cubit
Seems to cry out, "Howshall that Claribel
"Measure us back toNaples?
"Keep in Tunis,
And let Sebastian wake."
Say, this were death
That now hath seized them;why, they were no worse
Than now they are.
There be that can ruleNaples
As well as he that sleeps;lords that can prate
As amply and unnecessarily
As this Gonzalo; I myselfcould make
A chough of as deep chat.
O, that you bore
A mind that I do.
What a sleep were this
For your advancement.
Do you understand me?
Methinks I do.
And how does your content
Tender your own goodfortune?
I remember you did supplantyour brother Prospero.
True: And look how well mygarments sit upon me;
Much feater than before:my brother's servants
Were then my fellows; nowthey are my men.
But, for your conscience?
Ay, sir; where lies that?
If 'twere a kibe,
'Twould put me to myslipper: but I feel not
This deity in my bosom:twenty consciences,
That stand 'twixt me andMilan, candied be they
And melt ere they molest.
Here lies your brother,
No better than the earthhe lies upon,
If he were that which nowhe's like, that's dead;
Whom I, with this obedientsteel,
three inches of it,
Can lay to bed for ever;whiles you, doing thus,
To the perpetual wink foraye might put
This ancient morsel, thisSir Prudence, who
Should not upbraid ourcourse.
For all the rest,
They'll take suggestion asa cat laps milk;
They'll tell the clock toany business that
We say befits the hour.
Thy case, dear friend,
Shall be my precedent; asthou got'st Milan,
I'll come by Naples.
Draw thy sword: one stroke
Shall free thee from thetribute which thou payest;
And I the king shall lovethee.
Draw together;
And when I rear my hand,do you the like,
To fall it on Gonzalo.
O, but one word.
My master through his artforesees the danger
That you, his friend, arein; and sends me forth--
For else his project dies--to keep them living.
While you here do snoringlie,
Open-eyed conspiracy Histime doth take.
If of life you keep acare,
Shake off slumber, andbeware:
Awake, awake!
Let us both be sudden.
Now, good angels
Preserve the king.
Why, how now?
Ho, awake!
Why are you drawn?
Wherefore this ghastlylooking?
What's the matter?
Whiles we stood heresecuring your repose,
Even now, we heard ahollow burst of bellowing
Like bulls, or ratherlions: did't not wake you?
It struck mine ear mostterribly.
I heard nothing.
O, 'twas a din to fright amonster's ear,
To make an earthquake.
Sure, it was the roar
Of a whole herd of lions.
Heard you this, Gonzalo?
Upon mine honour, sir, Iheard a humming,
And that a strange onetoo, which did awake me:
I shaked you, sir, andcried: as mine eyes open'd,
I saw their weapons drawn:there was a noise,
That's verily.
'Tis best we stand uponour guard,
Or that we quit this place;let's draw our weapons.
Lead off this ground; andlet's make further search
For my poor son.
Heavens keep him fromthese beasts.
For he is, sure, i' theisland.
Lead away.
Prospero my lord shallknow what I have done:
So, king, go safely on toseek thy son.
All the infections thatthe sun sucks up
From bogs, fens, flats, onProsper fall and make him
By inch-meal a disease!
His spirits hear me
And yet I needs mustcurse.
But they'll nor pinch,
Fright me withurchin-shows, pitch me i'the mire,
Nor lead me, like afirebrand, in the dark
Out of my way, unless hebid 'em;
but for every trifle arethey set upon me;
Sometime like apes thatmow and chatter at me
And after bite me, thenlike hedgehogs which
Lie tumbling in mybarefoot way and mount
Their pricks at myfootfall; sometime am I
All wound with adders whowith cloven tongues
Do hiss me into madness.
Lo, now, lo!
Here comes a spirit ofhis, and to torment me
For bringing wood inslowly.
I'll fall flat;
Perchance he will not mindme.
Here's neither bush norshrub, to bear off anyweather at all,
and another storm brewing;I hear it sing i' the wind:
yond same black cloud,yond huge one,
looks like a foul bombardthat would shed his liquor.
If it should thunder as itdid before,
I know not where to hidemy head:
yond same cloud cannotchoose but fall bypailfuls.
What have we here?
A man or a fish?
Dead or alive?
A fish: he smells like afish;
a very ancient andfish-like smell;
a kind of not of thenewest Poor-John.
A strange fish.
Were I in England now, asonce I was,
and had but this fish painted,not a holiday fool there
but would give a piece ofsilver:
there would this monstermake a man;
any strange beast theremakes a man:
when they will not give a doitto relieve a lame beggar,
they'll lay out ten to seea dead Indian.
Legged like a man.
His fins like arms.
Warm o' my troth.
I do now let loose myopinion; hold it no longer:
this is no fish, but anislander,
that hath lately sufferedby a thunderbolt.
Oh, alas, the storm iscome again.
My best way is to creepunder his gaberdine;
there's no other shelterhereabout:
misery acquaints a manwith strange bed-fellows.
I will here shroud
till the dregs of thestorm be past.
I shall no more to sea, tosea,
Here shall I die ashore--
This is a very scurvy tuneto sing at a man's funeral:
well, here's my comfort.
The master, the swabber,the boatswain and I,
The gunner and his mateLoved Mall,
Meg and Marian andMargery,
But none of us cared forKate;
For she had a tongue witha tang,
Would cry to a sailor, "Gohang!"
She loved not the savourof tar nor of pitch,
Yet a tailor might scratchher where'er she did itch:
Then to sea, boys, to sea,boys, to see
and let her go hang.
This is a scurvy tune too:but here's my comfort.
Do not torment me: Oh!
What's the matter?
Have we devils here?
Do you put tricks upon'swith savages and men of Ind?
Ha.
I have not 'scapeddrowning to be afeard now
of your four legs; for ithath been said,
As proper a man as everwent on four legs
cannot make him giveground; it shall be saidso again
while Stephano breathesat's nostrils.
The spirit torments me;Oh!
This is some monster ofthe isle with four legs,
who hath, as I take it, anague.
Where the devil should helearn our language?
I will give him some relief,if it be but for that.
If I can recover him andkeep him tame
and get to Naples withhim, he's a present forany emperor
that ever trod on neat'sleather.
Do not torment me,prithee; I'll bring mywood home faster.
He's in his fit now
and does not talk afterthe wisest.
He shall taste of mybottle:
if he have never drunkwine afore,
it will go near to removehis fit.
If I can recover him andkeep him tame,
I will not take too muchfor him;
he shall pay for him thathath him,
and that soundly.
Thou dost me yet butlittle hurt;
thou wilt anon, I know itby thy trembling:
now Prosper works uponthee.
Come on your ways; openyour mouth;
here is that which willgive language to you, cat:
open your mouth; this willshake your shaking,
I can tell you, and thatsoundly:
you cannot tell who's yourfriend:
open your chaps again.
I should know that voice:it should be--
but he is drowned; andthese are devils:
O defend me!
Four legs and two voices:a most delicate monster.
His forward voice is tospeak well of his friend;
his backward voice is toutter foul speeches
and to detract.
If all the wine in mybottle will recover him,
I will help his ague.
Come.
Amen.
I will pour some in thyother mouth.
Stephano!
Doth thy other mouth callme?
Mercy, mercy.
This is a devil, and nomonster: I will leave him;
I have no long spoon.
If thou beest Stephano,touch me and speak to me:
for I am Trinculo, thygood friend Trinculo!
If thou beest Trinculo,come forth:
I will pull thee by thelesser legs:
if any be Trinculo's legs,these are they.
Thou art very Trinculoindeed!
How camest thou to be thesiege of this moon-calf?
Can he vent Trinculos?
I took him to be killedwith a thunder-stroke.
But art thou not drowned,Stephano?
I hope now thou art notdrowned.
Is the storm overblown?
I hid me under the deadmoon-calf's gaberdine
for fear of the storm.
And art thou living,Stephano?
O Stephano, twoNeapolitans 'scaped!
Prithee, do not turn meabout; my stomach is notconstant.
These be fine things, anif they be not sprites.
That's a brave god andbears celestial liquor.
I will kneel to him.
How didst thou 'scape?
How camest thou hither?
Swear by this bottle howthou camest hither.
I escaped upon a butt ofsack which the sailors
heaved o'erboard, by thisbottle;
which I made of the barkof a tree
with my own hands since Iwas cast ashore.
I'll swear upon that bottleto be thy true subject;
for the liquor is notearthly.
Here; swear how thouescapedst.
Swum ashore, man, like aduck:
I can swim like a duck,I'll be sworn.
Here, kiss the book.
Though thou canst swimlike a duck,
thou art made like agoose.
O Stephano.
Hast any more of this?
The whole butt, man: mycellar is in a rock
by the sea-side where mywine is hid.
How now, moon-calf.
How does thine ague?
Hast thou not dropp'd fromheaven?
Out o' the moon, I doassure thee:
I was the man i' the moonwhen time was.
I have seen thee in herand I do adore thee:
My mistress show'd me theeand thy dog and thy bush.
Come, swear to that; kissthe book:
I'll furnish it anon withnew contents, swear.
By this good light, thisis a very shallow monster.
I afeard of him?
A very weak monster.
The man i' the moon.
A most poor credulousmonster.
Well drawn, monster, ingood sooth.
I'll show thee everyfertile inch o' th' island;
And I will kiss thy foot:I prithee, be my god.
By this light, this is a mostperfidious drunken monster.
When 's god's asleep,he'll rob his bottle.
I'll kiss thy foot; I'llswear myself thy subject.
Come on then; down, andswear.
I shall laugh myself to deathat this puppy-headed monster.
A most scurvy monster.
I could find in my heartto beat him...
Come, kiss.
But that the poormonster's in drink:
abominable monster.
I'll show thee the bestsprings; I'll pluck theeberries;
I'll fish for thee and getthee wood enough.
A plague upon the tyrantthat I serve!
I'll bear him no moresticks, but follow thee,
Thou wondrous man.
A most ridiculous monster,to make a wonder of a poordrunkard.
I prithee, let me bringthee where crabs grow;
And I with my long nailswill dig thee pignuts;
Show thee a jay's nest andinstruct thee how
To snare the nimblemarmoset; I'll bring thee
To clustering filberts andsometimes I'll get thee
Young scamels from therock.
Wilt thou go with me?
I prithee now, lead the waywithout any more talking.
Trinculo, the king and all ourcompany else being drowned,
we will inherit here:here; bear my bottle:
fellow Trinculo, we'llfill him by and by again.
Farewell master; farewell,farewell!
A howling, drunkenmonster.
No more dams I'll make forfish
Nor fetch in firing Atrequiring;
Nor scrape trencher, norwash dish
'Ban, 'Ban, Cacaliban
Has a new master: get anew man.
Freedom, hey-day!
Hey-day, freedom!
Freedom, hey-day, freedom!
O brave monster!
Lead the way.